---
layout: post
title: The Reality of NanoTechnology
description: The concept of nanotechnology
tags: technology
published: true
---

According to the Center Responsible for Nanotechnology (CRN), _Nanotechnology_ is a new multidisciplinary branch of science that incorporates fundamentals of physics, chemistry, biology and technology in the engineering of functional systems at a molecular state. Sometimes known as molecular engineering, nanotechnology’s principle lies in the fact that properties of elements or compounds can be manipulated on a molecular and atomic level to design, plan, invent, innovate, maintain and build products and systems of sustainable importance to mankind.  <!--more--> Based on its development and operation at an atomic level, the technology thus derives its name from the smallest metric unit of measurement called a _‘nano-‘_that literally means a minute size in a range of 1 nanometer to 100 nanometers, for which a nanometer is equivalent to a billionth of a meter.

The concept of nanotechnology was first related by Richard Feynman, an American physicist in his presentation _“_[_There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/There%27s_Plenty_of_Room_at_the_Bottom)_,”_ at an [American Physical Society](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Physical_Society) meeting at [Caltech](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caltech) on December 29, 1959. (Gribbin & Gribbin, 1997). The talk attracted acceptance from various cycles of science as a profound inspiration for greater discoveries innanotechnology. It mainly provided prior findings thatmanipulated the molecular chemistry of substances,redefining the genesis of products and systems, their molecular behaviors and their reactions under various subjected conditions. The Feynmandiscovery was mainly advanced for modern application by Eric K. Drexler in his 1986 book ‘[_Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Engines_of_creation)_’_, which proposed the idea of a nanoscale “assembler” which would be able to build a copy of itself and of other items of arbitrary complexity with atomic control. (Drexler E. K., 1986). He furthermore reaffirmed this study in his 1991 PhD thesis _‘Molecular Machinery and Manufacturing with Applications to Computation’_through bridging the technology to traditional findings of classical, statistical, and quantum mechanics. The study additionally performed empiricalforce-field models developed in chemistry, to select and develop a set of practical modelsdescribing the key engineering properties of nanometer-scale mechanical systems. (Drexler K. E., 1991)

The advancement of nanotechnology in today’s era is therefore attributed to the preliminary works of Richard Feynman and the theoretical, academic and public works of Eric K. Drexler. Their studiesdrew conclusions for the development and popularization of conceptual frameworks in the technology with high-visibility experimental advances that drew additional wide-scale attention to the prospects of atomic control of matter. The proven technology is currently of sustainable importance in medicine, manufacturing, agriculture, electronics, food industry, aerospace and the military among others.

However, despite its advancement in application and the various scholarly support it has been accredited with, the technology is to a lighter extent receiving controversial opposition from critic scholars. As explained herein, these counter-studies mainly involve findings that include; a rising potential threat of robotics that replace the human workforce in industries, and human exposure to safety risks during its manipulation. (Weiss, 2005).

## **The Impact of Nanotechnology to Humanity today**

The discovery of nanotechnology has led to improvement of various fields of sustainable importance to mankindthrough development of smart hi-tech products that have been adopted for application in machines, tools, solutions, processes and systems we use today. The technology has extremely been broadened to encompass more specialized [fields of engineering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_engineering_branches) and applied science in medicine, food science, water resources management, aerospace science, business, electronics and computing. The technology, though still in its early stages of development has so far explicitly played an impact to humanity in the following ways;

### **Medicine**

The field of medicine has by far received a remarkable application of nanotechnology, far more than other fields of sustainable importance to humanity. The new technology has been implemented as an initial landmark for anatomical and physiological discoveries in medical research, drug pharmacology, diagnosis of infections, their preventions and in treatment of human and livestock diseases.These amazing developments have actually led to the evolvement of a new sub medical field known as **_nanomedicine_**that majorlyinvolves the applications of nanoparticles in earlier research of human medicine to build nano-robots that perform repairs and surgeries at a cellular level.

According to a 2015 (Nikalje, 2015) research paper, nanotechnology has been adopted in drug delivery through the development of nanoparticles that are specifically programmed for this role. In the technique, the required drug dose is administered and its side-effects are significantly lowered since the active agent is deposited directly in the affected region of the diagnosed body. It is additionally reported by (Cavalcanti, Shirinzadeh, Freitas, & Hogg, 2008) that nanoparticles can be used in pharmacology as agents in the relief of pain and destruction of pathogenic cells in patients. The (Cavalcanti, Shirinzadeh, Freitas, & Hogg, 2008)study further explains that nanoparticles in form of iron and gold shells can be used by physicians to destroy cancerous cells and tumors when directly applied to the affected regions of patients’ bodies.The technology is carried out in a highly selective approach that primarily focusses on the infected cells of the human body hence the creation of a direct link in the reduction of drug consumption and treatment expenses – a measure that is of both healthy and economical to the patient.

Additionally, nanotechnology has been of great application in the sub medical field of ophthalmology through its vast adoption in monitoring and improvement of human biological systems at a molecular level. According to (Nikalje, 2015), nano devices and nanostructures can be operated to unit cell levels in achieving medical benefits of altering human DNA prints. The principle involves biomimicry and pseudo intelligence models that are incorporated in treatment of oxidative stress, measurement of intraocular pressure, and prevention of scars after glaucoma surgery using nanomedicine methods. (Zarbin, Montemagno, Leary, & Ritch, 2013). Through these findings, the technology can be implemented in hospitals and other health departments to ease diagnosis of diseases and preventable disorders in this field of microbiology.

Conclusively, we can appreciate the role that has been played by nanotechnology in the field of medicine. We can use it as a revolutionary transformation for a target population of researchers, medical practitioners and patients in the detection, diagnosis and treatment of various disease infections and disorders that are affecting humanity today.

### **Food Science**

Nanotechnology has also been of great impact to the field of food science through the relation, development and application of its techniques in food production chains from its growth to its packaging for sale and consumption. The technology majorly focuses in the theory and practices of improved agriculture, food processing, nutritional value addition and food preservation as a fundamental implementation of globallyachieving a sustainable food security.

The technology hasprimarily been applied in this field to boast agricultural productivity through modification of various crop species, development of fertilizers and boasting of crop yields on a sustainable level. According to a 2015 study by (Saurabh, Bijendra, Yadav, & Gupta, 2015), nanotechnology can be used to provide new ways for the improvement of already existing crop management techniques like crop spraying, weed control and soil nutrient management. The study explained the bridging of old conventional crop management means of disease control with the technology where application of chemicals is only applied to the selected and required plant parts, thereby reducing problems such as; leaching of chemicals, degradation by photolysis, hydrolysis and microbial degradation. The (Saurabh, Bijendra, Yadav, & Gupta, 2015) study conclusively applauds nanotechnology for administering very low concentration of chemicals that would sustainably be economical to the farmer.

Additionally, the technology has been adopted in food processing and value addition by enhancing the preservation of food from traditional and conventional methods to more trusted and reliable high-tech means. In previous food science technologies, bioactive elements of lipids, carbohydrates and proteins that define nutritional values in the foods we eat would easily be deactivated through exposure to environments of high acidity and unfavorable temperatures. According to a study by (Trepti, Shruti, Pradeep, Verinder, Vivek, & Bajpai, 2017), nanotechnology can now be applied in nutritional preservation by encapsulation of the bioactive elements in nano-components that are able to resist high acidic and temperature conditions to preserve the engineered foods for longer periods of time before consumption.

In food science, the technology has extensively been applied in food packaging through the provision of new bioengineered packaging materials of high gaseous permeability and degradation factors. As compared to the convectional food packaging methods, food nano-packaging materials provide improved mechanic strengths, barrier properties, antimicrobial films to pathogen infections, and a sure safety acceptability status of food from the customers. (Mihindukulasuriya & Lim, 2014).

In a nutshell, nanotechnology can be used to play a pivotal role in the advancement of food science through blending the technology with already existing practices of food production to ensure a global food security for this generation and sustainability for the future.

### **Water Purification**

Water purification is defined as a method of removing undesirable components, contaminants, suspended particles and other debris from raw water for a sole purpose of making it suitable and portablefor human and industrial use. The process of purification involves physical means like filtration, sedimentation and distillation; biological means like slow sand filtration and sludge activation; as well as chemical means like chlorination and flocculation. However, with the advancement of nanotechnology, water purification can also easily be performed on a nanoscale using hi-tech molecular technologies that are subjected to individual water molecules. (Phys.Org, 2010)

According to the 2014 works of (Suvardhan, 2014), water purification can be incorporated with nanotechnology methods through development of smart materials of nano-filters as a replacement for traditional filters in water supply works. Nano-filtration is proven as a technique of filtration where microscopic and organic dissolved solids in [surface water](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_water) are removed by subjection to molecular membrane filtration.

Nanotechnology can therefore be adopted to the field of water resources management to mainly bridge the gap of the microscopic treatment of small pathogenic contaminants in domestic and industrial water – appreciating the fact that it is economical and reliable in the elimination of water pollutants that would be a threat to human life.

### **Electronics Engineering**

The field of electrical and electronics engineering is considered to be a leading application of nanotechnology, far more than all fields of sustainable importance to mankind. The technology has been advanced for adoption in the manufacture of smart electronic gadgets like computers, mobile phones, tablets, televisions and home theaters that have been beneficial to all cycles of humans throughout the world. Unlike the old convectional modes of electronics we had, today’s gadgets are famous for their reduction in physical weight and power consumption rates– a development that is attributed to nanotechnology.

### **Aerospace Engineering**

Nanotechnology has also been applied in aerospace engineering insystems and assembly materials that have made space flight an achievable and trusted means of transport. The technology is currently incorporated in the advancement of nanomaterials used in making lightweight aircraft body components, and in the manipulation of low fuel-powered aircraft engines.

According to the 2014 works of (Leonard & Padraig, 2014) in their book, ‘_Nanotechnology for Sustainable Manufacturing_’, it is published that nanotechnology can be applied in the modification of rocket engines by significantly decreasing their fuel consumption rates that in turn lowers the cost of orbit penetration and space exploration. In addition, the technology is so crucial in the engineering of new materials that are combined with nano-sensors and nano-robots used in the improvement of performances of spaceships, spacesuits, and other space and planet exploring equipment.

Conclusively, with the adoption of these nanomaterials and other nano-aerospace discoveries that are still under research, the field of aerospace and aircraft engineering will be boasted for the improvement of air transport facilities of airbuses and cargo planes throughout the world.

## **Controversies in the Field of Nanotechnology**

Like any other invented discovery of sustainable importance to the world, the field of nanotechnologyalso has negative impacts to humanity, vital ecosystems, water resources and the environment. (Weiss, 2005). During its implementation, the technology requires high levels of Risk Impact Assessments that are usually not performed, leading to a number of controversial criticisms from scholars, social activists and government departments – to set regulatory measures to the industrial and commercial use of nanomaterials that affect living organisms and ecosystems.

According to (Formoso, Muzzalupo, Tavano, De Filpo, & Nicoletta, 2016), the environmental impact of nanomaterials to ecosystems remains a leading negative effect of the technology. The (Formoso, Muzzalupo, Tavano, De Filpo, & Nicoletta, 2016) study analyzed nanotechnology’s environmental impact by considering it in two aspects; the potential for nano-technological innovations in improving the environment, and the possible types of pollution that the materials would cause after deposition into the environment – with conformity findings in the latter aspect.

## **Conclusion**

The field of nanotechnology, though still in its early stages of development remains of profound importance to humanitythrough its application in medicine, food science, agriculture, transport, electronics, crime detection and other sectors of life. As compared to its negative impacts, it is a requirement of research institutes, private manufacturers and governments in the establishment of its Risk Impact Assessments to achieve its benefits now and in the future without compromising our vital ecological systems.Nanotechnology, therefore needs to be adopted in the design, invention, repair and maintenance products and systems through the three elements of social, environmental and economic sustainability.
 

> source  [Blog](https://imranshaban.wordpress.com)

